---
layout: post
title: The first week or so
---

Rather than make posts summarising every day in excruciating detail, in this
post I'm going to tell you about out first week or so we spent aboard Carla.
I'll be honest, I can't remember dates exactly, and I'm mostly having to go on
photo timestamps since I didn't make many notes while cruising. Maybe I'll get
better at that...

After finding our first overnight mooring at Uxbridge, keen to keep travelling
north in a bid to at least get outside the M25, I set about with a couple of
maintenance tasks. Don't worry, we'll get to the cruising shortly. One of the
more important things to do _every time you finish cruising for the day_ is to
turn a little screw on something called the 'stern gland'. This brass assembly
is fairly important - it pumps grease into the area between the boat and the
propeller shaft (the thing that turns the propeller that makes the boat go).
This area is also 'packed' with a ring of cotton mixed with graphite.

![The stern gland](/images/02-stern-gland.jpeg)

_The stern gland_

If this area isn't stuffed with graphite and grease, canal water goes from being
in the canal to being in your boat. This isn't ideal. After a day or so of
cruising, it's not unusual that this area might be dripping slightly. A turn or
two of the stern gland usually resolves this. However, I could no longer turn
it. All the grease had been used up. Fear not, a couple of youtube searches, a
trip to the nearby chandlery and some greasy hands later and we were sorted. The
prop shaft is still dripping too much after a cruise for my liking, so it likely
needs to be repacked. Some scary internet posts suggested that if you get this
wrong you can sink your boat, so for the first time at least I'll ask someone
who has a clue to do it and I can watch.

Anyway, on to the fun stuff.

![Somewhere near Harefield](/images/02-fun-stuff.jpg)

The cruise from Uxbridge north was delightful and pretty easy. We travelled
through Harefield Moor, under lush greenery and rusted pipe bridges. The
surrounding area was full of lakes and wildlife, with me pointing out every
heron to Erin. Continuing north, we moored just outside/inside Rickmansworth
(just before bridge 174 if you want a really nice place to moor). It's a short
walk from the big Tesco (which also has mooring points!), relatively calm and we
didn't struggle to find a good spot. I decided to treat myself to a bottle of
scotch - something I've not done for at least a year - and we finished cruising
early, instead opting to watch the canal into the night. Passing us in the
opposite direction as a bloke operating a mobile pump-out boat (it pumps poo, in
case you were wondering).

![Scotch at Rickmansworth](/images/02-scotch.jpeg)

_Boating's a hard life..._

The next couple of days would prove to be a bit of a slog. From Rickmansworth to
Berkhamsted via Hemel Hempstead consisted of 31 locks over a 13 mile stretch.
However, after our first couple of locks we began sharing the work with the
aforementioned pump-out guy. Despite spending several hours cruising with him,
we never exchanged names. After some internet sleuthing, Erin has determined
he's probably a chap called Warren (and will henceforth be referred to as such.
Sorry if that's not your name, mate!), and he operates his pump-out service on
the south end of the Grand Union Canal. All of the locks in the southern part of
the GUC are wide locks - i.e., they can fit two 6' narrowboats in them. And this
makes things easier in two ways. Firstly, you've got more hands, which shares
the work. Secondly, with two boats in the lock, they tend to want to bash around
a little when you're filling or emptying (mostly filling).

I can't stress enough how much of a fantastic help Warren was. As well as giving
us plenty of tips for operating locks more efficiently (if you're narrow... just
open one gate) and general canal wisdom, his demeanour put our minds at ease
that we weren't completely screwing everything up and being a nuisance on the
canal. I think we travelled a little slower than he did, but every mile or so
he'd stop as someone requested (or had previously scheduled) a pump-out. He did
also tease us about wanting to spend winter somewhere warmer rather than
remaining on the cut... maybe enough to convince us that maybe _one_ winter
aboard is worth doing. After 10 or so locks with Warren we parted ways, only to
see him at what I presume is his permanent mooring the very next day. Cheers,
mate.

Actually, it if weren't for a trick picked up from Warren, we might have been
stuck for a little while. Locks along the canal come in a wide variety of states
of (dis)repair. Some have out-of-use paddles (the things that let water in and
out of the lock), some have gates that don't perform a very good seal so leak
water... Lock 62's bottom gate was _so_ leaky that the water flow against the
top gates was simply too powerful to be overcome by human alone. Thankfully, we
also have a 42HP diesel engine connected to about 15 tons of steel and ballast.
If you press the bow of your boat against the troublesome top gate and
absolutely floor your engine, it can be enough to force it open enough that the
lock equalises and the gate will open. Note that this will _only_ work for top
gates since they open outwards and bottom gates open inwards.

After passing through Hemel Hempstead, we moored by a pub in a very small
village called Winkwell. Prior to getting to the pub, we had to operate a big
electric swing-bridge. This is, as the name implies, a bridge that swings open.
On our rental holiday a few months ago, we got to operate manual ones (similar
to a lock, you just push). This one, however, required unlocking the controls
using a special key that all narrowboaters should have (if you're interested, it
looks to be a 6 or 7-pin Yale), and pressing some buttons. This makes some
noises, lowers some barriers (that stop actual cars on the actual road! We
shouldn't be allowed to do that should we?!) and rotates this huge construction
so we can potter through at 3mph. Very fun. Then we had a pint.

![Pints at the Three Horseshoes, Winkwell](/images/02-winkwell.jpg)

_Pints at the Three Horseshoes, Winkwell_

It's at this point that I'll leave this post since it feels like it's getting a
bit long. The next post, which hopefully _won't_ take 3 weeks to write and
publish, will cover the remaining days until our 2-week holiday in Ireland,
which we've just got back from. And here are a couple more pictures from this
journey.

![Coots](/images/02-coots.jpg)

_Coots! I kept calling them moorhens until Erin actually looked it up and
corrected me_

![Rusty thing](/images/02-rusty-thing.jpg)

_Some big rusty thing. An old warehouse? We love finding abandoned buildings
along the canal_
