---
layout: post
title: Narrowboat Telemetry
---

In this post, I'm going to explain how I developed and deployed a telemetry
system on the narrowboat, in order to track a number of useful things all in a
simple to use, unified and remotely accessible inferface. Do note that this is
going to be a very technical post - not the usual boat stuff. Also, while this
setup works for us, and some components might work for you, I probably wouldn't
recommend going out and buying all this stuff to achieve the same thing; a lot
of the stuff in this setup is there simply because that's what we had (for
example, I wouldn't suggest shelling out for a Teltonik RUTX50 router just
because it has a GPS module in it). However, you'd almost definitely be able to
cobble together a solution based on what you already have available, as well as
a few extra components if you so chose.

Below is the list of the broad things we track on the boat:

* Weather
* Position and speed
* Power
* Connectivity

## Background

Since getting the boat, we've both been interested in being able to track and
monitor basically anything that can be tracked and monitored on the boat, be it
the current amount of solar input, where we are in the system, strength of the
mobile signal, the weather... up until recently, we could somewhat track these
things but each using seperate applications, and not at all when we weren't on
the boat ourselves. Both me and Erin come from sysadmin backgrounds, so the
concept of live monitoring and reporting is something we're both very used to.

Having to check the Victron app for power-related things, Open Canal Map for our
current position, a wall-mounted weather station for weather information, logging
into the router to check signal strength... it was all a bit clunky so I sought
to unify everything.

![Collage of the old setup](/images/04-old-setup.jpg)

_The old, non-unified setup_

The main structure of the telemetry system is as follows: Data is collected on a
variety of different on-board devices (detailed below). This information gets
sent to a Raspberry Pi running [SignalK](https://signalk.org/) and a little
[script](https://github.com/s3krit/rutsnmp) I wrote to pull connectivity info
off my router. The Raspberry Pi then sends the data to a remote InfluxDB server,
which is used as a data source for Grafana running on the same remote machine.
In Grafana, we can then make fancy looking dashboards with all the stuff
collected from the boat. Looks a bit better, I think.

![Collage of the new grafana dashboards](/images/04-new-hotness.png)

_The new hotness_

## Data sources

Each of the pieces of data we receive come from somewhere. This section will
just cover the sources of this data. How we collect it and tie it all together
comes later.

###  Position, speed and networking

We semi-recently purchased a Teltonik RUTX50 router to replace our old Teltonik
something in order to add 5G functionality. As a bonus, this also came with a
GPS module and antenna. When I initially set the router up however, it was never
able to get a fix despite the GPS antenna being mounted on the roof. This issue
was resolved by doing a firmware upgrade. There is a slight problem in that
roughly once a day, the GPS daemon on the router will stop working. I fixed this
by adding a simple entry to the root user's crontab:

    root@Teltonika-RUTX50:~# crontab -l
    0 0/6 * * * /etc/init.d/gpsd restart

This simply restarts the GPS service every 6 hours. Problem solved.
The RUTX50 supports supplying this information using
[NMEA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Marine_Electronics_Association) to
a specified TCP port on a remote device. More on that later.

The RUTX50 can also supply information using a few other standards, such as
[SNMP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simple_Network_Management_Protocol) and
[MQTT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MQTT) but to be honest, I could never get
MQTT to work properly. I use the SNMP service for pulling information about
network connectivity, for example our signal strength in dBm, and whether we're
connected to a tower with 5G or just 4G (as well as data out, data in etc).

### Weather

For our weather data, we purchased the
[Wittboy](https://shop.ecowitt.com/products/wittboy), an absolutely great little
all-in-one weather solution. It actually comprises of two parts - the external
weather sensor (WS90) and a gateway (GW2000) inside that receives this
information, as well as collecting internal temperature and humidity data. The
WS90 is all solid-state - no rotating wind vanes or whatever's usually used to
gauge rainfall and sits very nicely on top of those little magnetic Kuma masts
that everyone (ourselves included) seems to use for mounting their mobile
antennae. The gateway supports sending the data it gathers to a variety of
different weather services, including
[Wunderground](https://www.wunderground.com/),
[WeatherCloud](https://weathercloud.net/en), and most importantly for us, a
custom-specified remote server.

###  Power

When we first purchased the boat, we only had a couple of Victron devices - a
smart charger for charging the batteries from a 240V power source, and a galvanic
diode isolator. Since then, we've stuck with Victron and have subsequently
purchased an MPPT, a smart battery monitor and an inverter - wouldn't have
bought the inverter but it turns out the old one didn't like having squash
poured into it and gave up its life with a very loud bang. All the Victron stuff
can communicate over bluetooth, which is really useful when you're on the boat
and want to know how much power you're getting from the solar panels, how much
power you're currently using, etc.
However, for our telemetry system, we currently only pull information from the
MPPT using a VE Direct to USB cable - meaning we can actually only read the
solar information and battery voltages using this setup. I've not yet looked
into pulling it all via bluetooth - there are a few (unofficial) projects that
could assist with doing it, I've just not checked them out yet.

## Collecting the data

Now that I've detailed where all this data's coming from, let's go into more
detail about how it's collected and turned into something we can send upstream
to be remotely available.

### Â SignalK

I found an old SD Card and a Raspberry Pi 4 that I've had lying around doing
nothing since we moved onto the boat (in its past life, it's been a NAS and a
media server), and got a fresh install of Debian installed on it. Erin mentioned
this project she'd seen called [SignalK](https://signalk.org/), which is a
service that is designed for collecting marine data and unifying it into a
single accessible format. Sounds exactly what we want. It has a great list of
plugins that we can use for expanding it to do exactly what we want. So, I
installed SignalK using their guide for doing so on a Raspberry Pi, which can be
found
[here](https://github.com/SignalK/signalk-server/blob/master/raspberry_pi_installation.md).

It already had the NMEA functionality installed by default, so in order to start
logging our position and speed information from the RUTX50, all I needed to do
was point the RUTX50's NMEA configuration page at it and telling SignalK to run
the NMEA server on port 10110.

![Configuring the RUTX50 to end NMEA data to the raspberry pi](/images/04-rut-nmea.png)

_Configuring the RUTX50 to send NMEA data to the Raspberry Pi_

![Configuring SignalK to listen on port 10110](/images/04-signalk-nmea.png)

_Configuring SignalK to listen on port 10110 to receive NMEA data_

There is also a [plugin](https://github.com/itemir/signalk-ecowitt/) for
receiving data from Ecowitt devices - namely the Ecowitt GW1000. However, it
doesn't currently have support for the GW2000. There is an open issue for this.
I forked the repository, added GW2000 support and submitted a pull request but
as of writing this post it's not been merged. As such, you can't install the
plugin via the SignalK. Instead, to use it, you would need to clone my
repository
[here](https://github.com/s3krit/signalk-ecowitt/tree/gw2000-support), check out
the `gw2000-support` branch and link the npm module as per the instructions
[here](https://github.com/SignalK/signalk-server/blob/master/SERVERPLUGINS.md#project-setup)
(just the relevant `npm link` instructions).

With the signal-ecowitt plugin operational, all I had to do then was point the
GW2000 at the Signalk server using the custom section of the weather services
page.

![Pointing the GW2000 at the SignalK server](/images/04-signalk-gw2000.png)

_Pointing the GW2000 at the SignalK server_

The Victron stuff was even easier! Literally all it required was installing the
'VE.Direct to Signal K' plugin in SignalK and connecting the VE.Direct to USB
cable between the MPPT and the Raspberry Pi. I didn't even need to change any
settings, it just started working!

### InfluxDB

The end goal is to be able to display all this data in set of Grafana dashboards
but Grafana needs to have a data source from which it can generate graphs. For
this, I'm opting to use InfluxDB for a couple of reasons - one, Erin's got a
fair bit of experience with it and two, there's an InfluxDB plugin for SignalK.
InfluxDB is a 'time-series' database - which is to say it focuses on just having
data stored as pairs of timestamps and some value at that time.
I'm not going to go into the details of how to set up an InfluxDB server here -
essentially, I just set up an Ubuntu 22.04 LTS server on
[Hetzner](https://www.hetzner.com) and followed the instructions for installing
and running Influx as a service
[here](https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/v2/install/?t=Linux). I didn't
bother doing it 'properly' with Docker or anything because it's a personal
project and to be honest I kind of missed the joy of just logging into machines,
poking around and throwing commands at it.

With Influx configured and running, I could now install the 'Signal K to
InfluxDb 2' plugin and configure it.

![SignalK Influx config](/images/04-influx.png)

_SignalK Influx config_

### RutSNMP

One thing that we could't do with SignalK is get the connectivity data from the
RUTX50. Despite having a wealth of plugins, one thing it *doesn't* have is
anything for SNMP support. It apparently has MQTT support but as I mentioned
earlier, I had no luck getting that to work. Instead, I wrote a simple little
script (which I mentioned earlier) that would manually pull the relevant SNMP
OIDs off the router and send them up to Influx directly. The code's pretty hacky
- each of the OIDs are specified manually with their numeric representation (for
example, the connection type OID is `1.3.6.1.4.1.48690.2.2.1.16.1`). This script
runs in a tmux session as a bash loop - the looping originally happened in the
Ruby script itself but for some reason appeared to have a memory leak and would
OOM after a day or so of running. The proper thing to do would be to fix this,
and have the thing run as a `systemd` service but to be honest, I just couldn't
be bothered.

##  Displaying the data

We've now got just about everything in place - we've got our sensors that are
measuring data. We've got them going to a time-series database that's externally
accessible. The final piece that's missing is some useful human-readable
representation of this data. For that I opted to use Grafana. Pairing Grafana
and InfluxDB is quite common, so there's plenty of information online of how to
do it and, again, Erin's got quite a bit of Grafana experience so she was a
great help in setting up the dashboards. As with Influx, I'm not going to go
into the specifics of installation - I basically just followed the instructions
[here](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/installation/debian/).
With Grafana installed, we could configure it to use Influx as a datasource,
which can just be done via Grafana's web interface.

Finally! We've got data going from all our sources into something that can
create beautiful dashboards. And here's what they look like!

I'm going to start with probably my favourite - which is the position and speed
dashboard.

![Position and speed dashboard](/images/04-position.png)

_The position and speed dashboard_

When underway, it'll display our current speed (I've yet to manage to hit 4mph,
but I've gotten close!) and the current heading. When stopped, we just use the
last non-zero value of the heading since when you're not moving, you can't use
GPS data to determine your heading. One great thing with this dashboard is
selecting different points in time and seeing where you were during that time.
It could also, in theory, be used to prove to CRT that you have indeed moved in
case you get one of those emails claiming you haven't (whether they'd listen to
your hacked together Grafana dashboard is another matter...).

And if you zoom out all the way (in time), you can see everywhere you've been!
Here's everywhere we've cruised since I got the thing set up (about 4 months
now). During that time, we were stuck on the Upper Peak Forest Canal for a
couple of months...

![Location history](/images/04-location-history.png)

_History of our location from the last 4 months_

The weather dashboard is another great triumph. With the Wittboy, we get such
a wealth of data it took a bit of time to get it all represented effectively.
Grafana lets you import dashboards from other people, and I *think* I did that
with this dashboard, but I modified it so much from the original that it doesn't
bear too much resemblance to it anymore. During the very rainy June and July we
had, it was great(!) to know that we were getting way more rainfall than those
months usually get.

![All weather](/images/04-all-weather.png)

_The entire weather dashboard, stitched together cause it's so big_

The connectivity and power dashboards are a little less interesting to look at
but are still nice and useful - especially when we're trying to find somewhere
to moor, it's nice to see how the signal strength changes. We can also
cross-reference this with historic location data to try to find good areas to
moor so Erin has good enough internet for having meetings, etc. The heatmap in
the connectivity dashboard needs work and doesn't currently represent anything
tremendously useful.

As mentioned, with the power, we currently only get information from the MPPT,
which includes solar input (wattage, current and voltage), and its readings from
the battery - which should be pretty accurate because it's connected to the
SmartGauge via VE.Smart networking.

![Connectivity dashboard](/images/04-connectivity.png)

_The connectivity dashboard. Sadly, we've only got LTE where we're currently moored_

![Power dashboard](/images/04-power.png)

_The power dashboard! If you look closely, you can see when I started the engine today_

##  External access

Just one last note before I write some closing remarks - in order for this stuff
to be *safely* externally accessible, I installed the NGINX webserver on the
remote server, pointing at Grafana as a [reverse
proxy](https://docs.nginx.com/nginx/admin-guide/web-server/reverse-proxy/). This
then allowed me to use [Let's Encrypt](https://letsencrypt.org/) to issue SSL
certificates.

Access control is simply done through Grafana - there's an admin account I use
for administrating the system, and a couple of read-only accounts that we've
shared with our families. My mum loves seeing that we're on the move, asking
where we're heading and reminiscing about her and my Dad's time in those areas.

##  Closing remarks

This post's been a bit all over the place in the sense that in some areas I
probably went into too much detail, and glossed over some things. But I hope it
serves to show that it's possible to clobber together a bunch of different
technologies and create a nice little solution. Since leaving my job in tech
over a year ago, it's been fun to do system administration and service
deployment again, using a couple of technologies I wasn't that experienced with.

And one remark about using this to track your boat movements - since setting up
this telemetry service, I've been made aware of two separate projects being
developed to log your location on the network.

- [Drift Diary](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.driftdiary.app)
- [Float](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.floatapp.android)

These are *much* easier to get set up with than this beast I've put together,
but don't really support continued logging of your location (as well as everything
else). Drift Diary works by using the location data embedded in photos to
determine their location, while Float has you announce in the app when you have
left and arrived in order to track your movements. While they're only semi-related
to this post, I still thought they were worth mentioning.

Cheers, and until next time!